AI task docs (#39640)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/ai_task.markdown

| ---------------------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `task_name`            | no       | String that identifies the type of text generation task (e.g., "home summary", "alert notification").           |
| `instructions`         | no       | String containing the specific instructions for the AI to follow when generating the text.                      |
| `entity_id`            | yes      | String that points at an `entity_id` of an LLM task entity. If not specified, uses the default LLM task.       |

```yaml
# Example: Generate a notification when garage door is left open
automation:
- alias: "Garage door notification"
  triggers:
    - trigger: state
      entity_id: cover.garage_door
      to: 'on'
      for:
        minutes: 10
  actions:
    - action: ai_task.generate_text
      data:
        task_name: "garage door left open comment"
        instructions: "Funny notification that garage door left open"
      response_variable: generated_text
    - action: notify.mobile_app
      data:
        message: "{{ generated_text.result }}"

> ```

Reviewer: author uses the correct, modern termiology.
However the `{{}}` likely need escaping as they do not show in the code render on the example page
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7af1b362-7a1e-4496-85be-6f36c6acd690)

---
title: AI Task
description: Instructions on how to setup AI task entities with Home Assistant.
ha_category:
  - AI
ha_release: '2025.7'
ha_quality_scale: internal
ha_domain: ai_task
ha_codeowners:
  - '@home-assistant/core'
ha_integration_type: entity
---

> This integration allows Home Assistant to use AI to help you configure it.

Reviewer: Should there be more info in the docs on how to configure an ai task entity for each task type?

Author: That's done in the paragraph below. I will enhance it.

{% include integrations/building_block_integration.md %}

> Users are able to set per task their preferred AI task entity. This allows users to have different AI models for different purposes, such as generating text, summarizing information, or even controlling devices. When the entity ID is omitted in the action, the preferred AI task entity will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users are able to set preferred AI task entity for each task in the frontend. This allows users to have different AI models for different purposes, such as generating text, summarizing information, or even controlling devices. When the entity ID is omitted in the action, the preferred AI task entity will be used.
```

Reviewer: Looks as if you accidentally edited the suggestion but didn't commit it
Tagging as comment is resolved @balloob .

## The state of an AI task entity

> The state of a text-to-speech {% term entity %} is a timestamp showing the date and time when text-to-speech was last used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state of an AI task {% term entity %} is a timestamp showing the date and time when AI task was last used.
```
Capitalisation? 'AI Task' or 'AI task'?

## Action `ai_task.generate_text`

Generates text using AI.

| Data attribute | Optional | Description                                                                                                     |
| ---------------------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `task_name`            | no       | String that identifies the type of text generation task (e.g., "home summary", "alert notification").           |
| `instructions`         | no       | String containing the specific instructions for the AI to follow when generating the text.                      |
| `entity_id`            | yes      | String that points at an `entity_id` of an LLM task entity. If not specified, uses the default LLM task.       |

Response variable is a dictionary with the following keys:

- `text`: The generated text.
- `conversation_id`: The ID of the conversation used for the task.

> ```yaml

Author: ```suggestion
{% raw %}
```yaml
```

# Example: Generate a notification when garage door is left open
automation:
- alias: "Garage door notification"
  triggers:
    - trigger: state
      entity_id: cover.garage_door
      to: 'on'
      for:
        minutes: 10
  actions:
    - action: ai_task.generate_text
      data:
        task_name: "garage door left open comment"

>         instructions: "Funny notification that garage door left open"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        instructions: "Generate a funny notification that garage door was left open"
```

      response_variable: generated_text
    - action: notify.mobile_app
      data:

>         message: "{{ generated_text.result }}"

Reviewer: The `{{}}` likely need escaping as they do not show in the code render on the example page
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7af1b362-7a1e-4496-85be-6f36c6acd690)

---
title: AI Task
description: Instructions on how to setup AI task entities with Home Assistant.
ha_category:
  - AI
ha_release: '2025.7'
ha_quality_scale: internal
ha_domain: ai_task
ha_codeowners:
  - '@home-assistant/core'
ha_integration_type: entity
---

> This integration allows Home Assistant to use AI to help you configure it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **AI Task** {% term integration %} allows you to use AI to help you configure Home Assistant.
```

{% include integrations/building_block_integration.md %}

> Users are able to set preferred AI task entity for each task in the frontend. This allows users to have different AI models for different purposes, such as generating text, summarizing information, or even controlling devices. When the entity ID is omitted in the action, the preferred AI task entity will be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each task, you can set a preferred AI task entity. This allows you to use different AI models for different purposes, such as generating text, summarizing information, or even controlling devices. When the entity ID is omitted in the action, the preferred AI task entity will be used.
```

## The state of an AI task entity

The state of an AI task {% term entity %} is a timestamp showing the date and time when AI task was last used.

## Action `ai_task.generate_text`

Generates text using AI.

| Data attribute | Optional | Description                                                                                                     |
| ---------------------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `task_name`            | no       | String that identifies the type of text generation task (e.g., "home summary", "alert notification").           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `task_name`            | no       | String that identifies the type of text generation task (for example, "home summary", "alert notification").           |
```

| `instructions`         | no       | String containing the specific instructions for the AI to follow when generating the text.                      |
| `entity_id`            | yes      | String that points at an `entity_id` of an LLM task entity. If not specified, uses the default LLM task.       |

> Response variable is a dictionary with the following keys:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response variable is a dictionary with the following keys:
```

- `text`: The generated text.
- `conversation_id`: The ID of the conversation used for the task.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Example
```

> ## Example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Example

```

---
title: AI Task
description: Instructions on how to setup AI task entities with Home Assistant.
ha_category:
  - AI
ha_release: '2025.7'
ha_quality_scale: internal
ha_domain: ai_task
ha_codeowners:
  - '@home-assistant/core'
ha_integration_type: entity
---

The **AI Task** {% term integration %} allows you to use AI to help you configure Home Assistant.

{% include integrations/building_block_integration.md %}

For each task, you can set a preferred AI task entity. This allows you to use different AI models for different purposes, such as generating text, summarizing information, or even controlling devices. When the entity ID is omitted in the action, the preferred AI task entity will be used.

## The state of an AI task entity

> The state of an AI task {% term entity %} is a timestamp showing the date and time when AI task was last used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {% term state %} of an AI task {% term entity %} is a timestamp showing the date and time when the AI task was last used.
```
